---
layout: post
title: On Suicide
date: 2017-07-25
---

I've thought a lot about being in the military, and a lot of it was spurred by depression. I told my mom when I first started noticing how bad it was getting, but I couldn't convey my emotions because I spoke broken Bengali and she spoke broken English. When she glimpsed what I meant, she just said "No, [son]". Her English wasn't the only thing broken that night, [heyooo][heyo]! The rest of the family wasn't much help either. My dad just got angry, and picked a lot of fights with me (I reciprocated). My brother tried making the old jokes, but I needed someone to stand up for my right to exist. No one really did tell me I deserve to live for a while, me included. Not wanting to live, I wanted to die doing the things I thought fun at the time: scuba diving, martial arts, staying in shape, parachuting, being among peers, respect, camping, shooting, and -oh right, dying. A nifty military job was all the rage according to most of the [media][lauraBush] I'd watched, comments at parties I'd heard, and friends/role models I trained with. I heard about Marines OCS through college friends, but got rejected at MEPS. They told me my application would be flagged for three years, but only with the Marines/Navy. So I looked for other branches, and I heard about Airforce PJs. The mission was charming, in that it involved the best of the best jumping into brutal situations and risking your life to save another, while maybe taking a few lives on your way. If I can't enjoy living, at least the other person will.

There are many cruel jokes the universe can play. There's the joke of being born in a country of less emotional worth to a powerful nation's zeitgeist. Collateral damage gets shrugs, but wounded American soldiers get pure grief. Nothing against our brave countrymen, just we should grieve for innocents just as much as our own troops. We should also fucking look out [for][va0] [our][va1] [warfighters (first 7 pages should do)][va2] because funding a war without planning for casualties is either moronic and/or immoral. I'm interested in hearing honest comments, stories, and criticisms by soldiers. Shoot me an email if you want, or just shoot me. I've lived a great life, and I'm content to die. I've seen my hopes shattered, my friends turn to angels, and more than a few stormy days. I can die happy, because one of my proudest feats is turning sorrow to strength.

Depression is a cruel joke. The quiet, bright tinge of life fades from your view for a period of time determined in a genetic lottery no one asked for. The color goes from the light. The future only seems like a bleak wasteland where people kill over water. Moving outside your bed after the third bedridden day is a herculean task, so you become a sleepy, angry person and forget what having fun means. People will blame you, asking if you tried stopping. They'll say it's in your head and you're being a stick in the mud. They'll say they don't know what to do and do nothing. They'll get angry. You'll feel alone. It's a curse if there's ever been one, and no small part of that curse comes from the perception of mental health problems. Some people just "deal with it", but those some are monks of the highest caliber or people who struggled and suck at vocalizing it, empathizing with it, or legitimately "dealing with it". One of the punchlines of depression is that it's very difficult to seek help. Recognizing you are depressed takes awareness, and admitting that it's gotten pretty bad takes strength. Reaching out to save your life is hard when you know you want to die. I had trouble reaching out because I didn't consider myself worth the effort and didn't want to bother my friends. Struggling silently was, is, and always be a misplay. Every time after I broached my self-limitation of asking for an ear to vent to, I felt way, way better. Weird, right? I can't urge you enough to consider seeking professional help. Mental illness is still illness, and you sure as hell don't let tuberculosis just run it's course because "it's just a phase"; you see a doctor.

To clear up some misconceptions for the uninitiated, suicidal depression is like wanting to scratch your junk in public. You fight the urge, but eventually you stop giving a fuck and do the deed. It's not like you suddenly think death is great, it's like a rash you know you shouldn't scratch but do. Others use drugs, sex, or company. Choose wisely, as the measure of a man is in how he copes. Find a constructive distraction. Having known how you might have died, it makes you question why you've never lived. I warded off the itch with hobbies, because I'm tired of not being able to do things and wallowing at how few things I can do. Feeling useful is my cure. You can't become useful without work, but the cure doesn't come from the result. It comes from trying. Enjoying the process of getting better at skills helped me enjoy the process of getting happier. Now is the time to try. Now is the time to rise. Whatever passion you choose to chase, it will feel pointless. Again, it's about the chase. No one has had your exact struggle before, and no one knows why you chose to be a champion apple carver, but there is no better feeling than doing something because it beats doing nothing forever. It's a tiny ray of plain daylight, but it's your daylight. You will still struggle with depression though, even with all the skills in the world. Warding off the itch is work, but it becomes habit after a while. Once you realize the dark clouds will pass over the wizened mountain, the world warms, even if the clouds are on you. You get good at finding your daylight. Colors pop like never before. Air is sweet. You'll treasure the friends you have, and you treat every embrace like it could be your last. You know all too well it might have been.

Wishing for death is a blessing, as it helps you understand what your happiness is. Each moment that makes you glow is a moment you know you couldn't have witnessed had you scratched the itch. Shitty days pop up, but they're peanuts compared to the demons you've faced. There is nothing that can tear down your happiness because you've built it from the base up. Every smile you give is a sun ray; every laugh a melody. There's a quiet type of pride that comes to the person who intimately knows how to be happy because they're innately sad. It's emptiness all the way down, and depression is the guide to realizing that. Some people have no strife, and I pity them. Depression is a great challenge, but beyond it lies an unshakable contentment in life. You won't be happy all the time, but you're fine with it. That is true strength. Not everyone gets an opportunity like this. It gives you a chance to grapple with the void and be okay knowing you'll lose. It is rewarding to understand that all eternities for all beings end in death. It's wonderful training to run head on into emptiness and anxiety. It's wonderful training to understand that no one is ever done growing or suffering. It's wonderful training to live humbly.

[heyo]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ji-cT58rgNc
<!--  cory -->
[lauraBush]:http://www.truthdig.com/cartoon/item/20061117_mr_fish_story_time_with_laura
[va0]:http://www.blogs.va.gov/VAntage/25331/listening-to-the-voices-of-veterans-and-their-journey-in-the-appeals-system/
[va1]:http://www.americanpatriotdaily.com/latest/left-behind-and-let-down-shameful-treatment-of-our-veterans/
[va2]:http://carnegieendowment.org/files/0408_transcript_stiglitziraq.pdf?zoom_highlight=joseph
