Recent improvements in my health have given me the freedom to screw my head on straight. I've been grappling with Post Concussion Syndrome for about two and a half years, and it's just now starting to clear. Cardio, meditation, breaks and work, and prioritizing sleep have been vital in my recent recovery. I can't thank [Dr. Joel C Morgenlander][] enough for prescribing me thresholded cardio to accelerate my healing. I am so thankful for the friends and family that helped me maintain my sanity while being half a man with a shattered identity. Who needs an identity anyways? 

I'm very grateful to be blessed with impetus to wise up in my early twenties, because wisdom and the world benefit from compound interest. I've learned how to fight, but better yet when to fight. Although I've had to give up martial arts completely, I feel closer to it than ever before. My life is steeped in it. My martial arts spirit is now just a part of me I know how to release productively. Whatever needs destroying will be destroyed. Most things need building though. Our minds, bodies, and hearts especially benefit, and any benefits we reap compound to benefit the people we interact with. Each of our lives have incredible, entagled effects on the world. We form a web of help and harm with our actions. 

I almost [killed a kid][] with reflexes and intentions I could barely control at the time. I had a vision mid-punch. I saw a glowing purple, golden web and a hole punched through the center. I saw the church choirs singing, the funeral bells ringing, and the announcement at school. I suffered from PTSD after the altercation, and it's an isolating disorder. My isolation was shattered by a Joe Rogan podcast. 

On her podcast [episode][], Miriam Nakamoto tripped mushrooms while an amatuer Thai boxer, and thought about accidentally killing her opponent in the ring. She saw a golden web with a hole punched through it. I had to pull over on the highway. Who knows how many people have had this vision? Over how many generations?! I am so humbled to have been shown a shared wisdom passed down for generations of the noblest apes. Wisdom is, has been, and always will be rediscovered in many different cultures in many different centuries. The least I can do is contribute my simian site to the infinite churn of human wisdom. I'm renaming this site to The Infinite Churn, because I'm still awestruck and humbled by our shared vision. 

Thank you Miriam and Joe.
