---
layout: post
title: My Odyssey
date: 2019-05-21
---

For almost the past two years, I've been struggling with [Post Concussive Syndrome][pcs] (PCS). Known as the invisible injury due to the physical form looking fine, it's a poorly understood ailment where concussion symptoms last for months to years. Some victims never fully recover. PCS is radically different from person to person, and the array of possible specialists you need is daunting. This series of articles is meant to act as a beacon of hope for fellow PCS patients. The series also doubles to remind myself of the lessons I learned since a healthy mind is so quick to forget the wealth gained from injury. I've been wanting to move to Seattle and start my dream job of being a penetration tester for the [NCC Group][ncc] (formerly Matasano). They're reknowned as top-shelf when it comes to cryptography. Crypto knowledge will come in handy for future endeavors, but the winds of fate have some odd, frustrating, yet enlightening paths charted out for me to get there. As you'll see, this concussion was a blessing in a shitty package. It's been almost two years grappling with PCS, and I'm not out of the woods yet.

I got my sixth and latest concussion doing judo. We were practicing falls, and I fell flat on my back without turtling. I didn't hit my head at all. I only saw a little flash, but I realized I hadn't felt that since boxing. I went home glad to be back on the mat with the old high of endorphins and brain damage. I went to a meditation retreat the next day, where a friend convinced me to see a doctor. The first symptoms were confusion, trouble focussing, and a little bit of head fog. These started about two days after the incident and worsened each day. Two weeks after the injury I saw Dr. Kristen Clarey at [Carolina Family Practice and Sports Medicine][cfpsm]. I would've just gone to a brothel if I'd known how much she'd jerk me around. Her first diagnosis was a concussion, but the IMPACT test (a cognitive assesment) was only slightly below regular brains. I told her it was my fourth concussion. At the time I believed this, but later recounted with more lax standards. You don't need to get knocked out to have a concussion. A large component of the assessment was a subjective statement of how bad each symptom is today. I realized many appointments after I was underestimating these symptoms. The exam continued by checking my eye's convergence and divergence distances. Convergence is measured by bringing an object to your nose and measuring where you first see double or lose focus. A healthy maximum is about 10 cm. My eyes were initially at 13 cm. Divergence is measured by moving the object from the convergence point out until you gain focus again. The astute among you may think, "How this isn't the same boundary as convergence?" You can probably find that answer on a medical blog, because I'm not a doctor. Dr. Clarey went on to check my neck mobility which was poor. She gave me some neck stretches to do and said to come back in a month if I wasn't better. The stretches helped, but more symptoms were coming on. 

I started getting headaches, dizziness, and nausea. I was mixing up words, and I felt slower in conversations. I didn't have the timing necessary for jokes anymore. I couldn't spend socialize at a party or go to a movie without suffering symptoms. I went back to Dr. Clarey. When I got there, she was surprised to see me. This would be a recurring theme. I did another IMPACT test with similar results, and we checked the same things. This time she assigned me neck strengthening exercises. Within days, I ecstatically reached a new plateau. I kept up with the stretching and strengthening for two months, but couldn't break my plateau. I still felt slow, foggy, and unfocused. My boss at the time wasn't very understanding of my condition and gave me a lot of flak for being slow and forgetting things. I brought up Dr. Clarey's recommendations of taking breaks every hour and allowing more time for tasks to get done. My boss said to do what I need, but would continue to say I'm working too slow for months. On hearing such reviews, I began self-censoring my doctor's suggestions. I learned the hard way that no one will advocate for you. I should've pushed for accomodation, gotten HR involved, and/or been annoying about how hurt I am. At one point, I was publicly rebuked for not remembering something. I should've publicly responded I don't have much memory anymore. No one knows how bad an invisible injury is unless you tell them. You deserve the care. You're not a burden by speaking up. The hard workouts I was used to would trigger my symptoms, and my body lost fifteen pounds of muscle. I started feeling isolated by not being able to socialize, workout, work, or better my skills for a future career in cybersecurity. I felt like my armor was gone. I was used to being able to cut problems in half with patient, laser-like focus. I couldn't approach the world with the same reckless abandon anymore. I went into a funk and smoked a lot of weed to cope with the increasing headaches and nausea. I stewed and kept doing my exercises. The costs of a childhood of fighting were starting to sink in.  

I'll continue the medical journey in future articles, but for now I want to focus on a curiosity I've noticed since first realizing I had PCS. People tend to show their character when faced with hard times and bad news, so it was interesting watching people react to hearing about the invisible injury and effects they didn't know about. The responses I got from people revealed how they viewed mental health issues. Some reactions were disbelief and laughing about it, ignoring it, understanding and eager to help (the vast majority of people), and being overly-helpful without understanding. It took me too long to realize the guys who didn't believe me and kept pressuring me to drink weren't my friends. That was a failure in my judgement. It became all too clear when one of them asked me if I thought football players crying from their brain damage was funny. I imagine they think the rise in [special forces suicides][socom] is hilarious. Ignoring it was a polite reaction by a lot of people. Observers may often minimize or dismiss your symptoms, since the injury doesn't show outward symptoms. The brain breaks in mysterious ways. Rarely, it was the mentality of "I'm good so you must be good too". Not the worst, but be prepared to give these people a brief summary and move on. They can often be bright points in your day after moving on in the conversation. The majority of people are eager to understand and help in whatever way feasible since most people are at least halfway decent. That kernel of decency can go too far though. If someone I haven't informed sees me wretching in a trashcan or struggling to walk, they'll be so eager to help and throw suggestions my way. It's funny that when I need to verbalize my struggles the most is when I have trouble verbalizing anything. During a fire drill where I overexerted myself and went blind temporarily, everyone was eager to help but thought I passed out from heatstroke. I got three ice packs that afternoon. A manager who knows my condition helped ward off the well-intentioned busybodies. Since that day, I've gotten a group of people informed on my various failure states who will help keep bystanders at bay.

I made many mistakes while injured. I wish I'd taken some time off after the initial concussion. Thanksgiving was my first long break about three months after the injury, and I healed so much just by relaxing with family for a week. The biggest thing I'd change is not getting a second opinion and doing my research sooner. Doctors aren't all equal, and just because someone's specialty is concussions doesn't mean they're able to help you. The medical industry is a labyrinth. Thankfully, my company hires a service called [OnPulse][onpulse], which is a team of former medical industry professionals who will help you navigate the labyrinth, find specialists for your case, research these specialists, and handle insurance disputes for you. Unfortunately, my boss at the time didn't know we had this service, so I didn't get up with them for a year and three months. I also would've scheduled more regular appointments with my doctor. She may have said come back in a month, but I should've aggressively gone every two weeks. Dr. Clarey's weakness was not firmly giving me a comprehensive recovery suite. Each new technique was learned after months of stagnating. The fault is both mine and hers. She did the same tests and gave me new exercises each time. I didn't go regularly and was underestimating my symptoms. Dr. Clarey didn't think four concussions was bad, but took my health more serioiusly when I told her I'd had six. When I started feeling isolated, I should've told my friends I can't socialize like I used to be able to. If you want to support a friend struggling with PCS, support their choice to withdraw from a situation and reaffirm them you'll be there when they're ready to come back. You may need to adapt your socializing to less stimulating situations. 

Some of the funner hurdles of PCS are personality changes. I've been more impulsive for a while. I have more intrusive thoughts that just don't seem like me. I understand how easy it is to impulsively buy things. I'll start projects (including this one) in a frenzy. I've gotten anxiety attacks for the first time in my life. There may be too many cars when I'm driving, or the wind will shift when I'm on my right foot. I can empathize with freaking the fuck out over nothing. It's not great, but I'm actually grateful and glad I get to play the game with all these qualities. Not everyone gets challenges to overcome in their life. These are mine, and I'm going to convert them into lessons that only death can take from me. I sincerely hope this helps someone.


[pcs]:https://www.healthline.com/health/post-concussion-syndrome
[ncc]:https://www.nccgroup.trust/us/
[cfpsm]:https://cfpsm.com/
[socom]:https://www.cnn.com/2019/02/02/politics/socom-military-suicide-spike-2018/index.html
[onpulse]:https://www.onpulse.com/employers/
