I drew my bow today. I strung it too! This is the first symptom-free success I've had for either in the past three years. I've finally been able to get back on the horse I was climbing a year ago. I'll be detailing my medical findings soon in an article.

I sustained my sixth countable concussion almost three years ago, and the damage really added up. I made mistakes with the medical system, had pressure keeping my job, and didn't let go of unhealthy mindsets soon enough. We are not this body; not these thoughts. We are not these histories, timelines and stories we tell ourselves to give our selves continuity. The self is empty, in that it takes a machine to keep it in place. Many machinations occur to sustain the idea of a self. This is not to say a self is inherently bad, but it is a way to view this reality in a diverse toolkit of lenses. Although it's been a couple of grueling years, I've been persistent. No stones unturned in the pursuit of "normalcy".

Persistence itself is not beyond overturning. It's empty, just like the self. It relies on a certain view of time to exist in the mind. This is the view that time is discrete and this moment exists on its own _with no dependencies._ If nothing exists on it's own since it's composed of parts, then what are those parts composed of? If time is viewed in such a way, it would mean I wasted three damn years in my twenties to string a bow. Instead there are moments of healing and moments of suffering. Instead there is only a whole world to better every day: starting from my head and going all the way up into the people and environment I live in. It can be percieved as persistence. It can also not. 

The ocean turns stones to sand through a non-perception of time. Waves do not have the concept of time, so cannot be persistent. There's still plenty of sand though. I love my fate and am so thankful to be here.
