I don't intend to offend anyone with this post. I seek to unify seemingly disparate philosophies because at the end of the day we're all on this Earth together. I believe Abrahamic religions and Buddhism are two superficially different approaches to the same truth. Although I mostly speak of Christianity and Buddhism, I assume other religions fit this pattern as well. I'm only familiar with these two, so I can only speak to these two. Sri Ramakrishna, Shinzen Young, and many others have outlined how there are many paths to the same truth. After witnessing the similarities of God and emptiness, I believe these two words belie the same truth, two sides of the same coin if you will. It's been said one of the main problems of philosophy is that most debates boil down to a disagreement in definitions. 

To illustrate the coin these two approaches illuminate, I'll use Rob Burbea's [_Seeing That Frees_](https://www.amazon.com/Seeing-That-Frees-Robert-Burbea/dp/0992848911). I discovered Rob Burbea's work in the FAQ of [r/streamentry](https://www.reddit.com/r/streamentry/). Unfortunately, Rob passed away recently after a long struggle with cancer. His work has been so comprehensive, detailed, and straight forward helping many souls reach salvation. Rob has been a real gem of a person, and his life will echo on long past his death. Along with _Seeing That Frees_, I'll be using various Zen and Buddhist texts.

A good friend gave me Thomas Merton's [_New Seeds of Contemplation_](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/1133302-new-seeds-of-contemplation). _New Seeds_ is a phenomenal bundle of notes from a Christian monk named Thomas Merton. He organized his notes during his years of contemplation (or meditation), with many, many wisdoms on the fundamental nature of God. In some versions, he prefaces his book by saying how he is merely one of many Christian scholars, monks, and explorers realizing the glory of emptiness and God's plan.

So let's start with broad strokes. Emptiness is interdependence. Emptiness is a fundamental nature, in that nothing exists on its own, and everything is an interconnected expression of this fundamental nature. God is the loving force that created the universe. God is said to be all-encompassing, "the First and Last, the beginning and the end". Emptiness is similar: "Because things exist, they are empty. Because they are emtpy, they exist." These two aren't incompatible. Emptiness is a chain of cause-and-effect. Buddhism chooses not to answer what was the first cause of the universe. God is the first cause, as well as the chain of cause-and-effect. 

To attain the generous, joyful, creative qualities of monks, Christianity and Buddhism point practitioners in two opposing directions: fullness and emptiness, respectively. Both paths require a bit of the other however. In Christianity, we are asked to manifest God's will and allow God's light to shine through our souls and create generosity, love, and beauty for His sake. To do so, we have to empty and purify our personality until it is refined enough to let the light through. In Buddhism, we are asked to negate that anything exists disconnected, which we can relax into to create spontaneous, joyful, loving actions. After understanding that everything we percieve is fabrication, we must then choose what to fabricate. Both sides of the coin must be integrated into our subconscious mind to be truly liberated.

>"God does not give us graces or talents or virtues for ourselves alone. We are members one of another and everything that is given to one member is given for the whole body. I do not wash my feet to make them more beautiful than my face." Merton, p56

>"Those who serve the ruler directly are as much subjects of the ruler as those who serve indirectly. How far apart are they? They are like hands and feet in the service of the ruler. Are the feet different from the hands because they are farther away?" The Life-Giving Sword

These quotes both illustrate the concept of interdependence in relation to God/emptiness. _The Life-Giving Sword_ is a Zen text from a reknowned swordsman Yagyu Munenori. Although the quote refers to rulers and subjects, the [deification of Japanese emperors](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3773631) makes service to your ruler akin to serving God. In this light, we improve the gifts we've been given not to make ourselves shine brighter, but to inspire others' to share the gifts they've been given. This inter-being is the heart of Buddhist practice. Although seeing how improving yourself affects the outer fringes of the world can be hard to see, it is simpler when you look at any household object around you. Look at any furniture nearby, say this table. 



>"We cannot go to heaven to find him because we have no way of knowing where heaven is or what it is. He comes down from heaven and finds us." Merton, p39

Nirvana is the cessation of self. It is when the mind grasps its true emptiness of self and universe. You yourself can try to achieve Nirvana, but Nirvana is not grasped through agency. The mind grasps and "you" witness. I do not think Heaven and Nirvana are the same thing, but this similarity seemed worth mentioning. 

>"It is in the deepest darkness that we most fully possess God on earth, because it is then that our minds are most truly liberated from the weak, created lights that are darkness in comparison to Him; it is then that we are filled with His infinite Light which seems pure darkness to our reason." p135  

Merton talks about how God's light is so incomprehensibly full that it appears to be darkness to us. God sent an actual incarnation of himself in Jesus, and the people of the time thought he was blasphemous because the ordinary mind cannot recognize godliness. A similar concept, or lack of concepts, is found in Buddhism. One Zen monk [Dogen suggested](https://augustmeditations.wordpress.com/2015/05/14/dogens-backward-step/) that after a certain point, we need to embrace the fact that no intellectual arguments can take you to Experience as it is (suchness). [Words can take you close](https://uklineale.github.io/2020/04/11/more-than-words-can-say.html), but not all the way. You must drop conceptions if you want to proceed. Be careful not to pick up the concept of "dropping of conceptions"!

[Unity seems more and more pressing during these pandemic times](https://www.statnews.com/2021/08/27/its-easy-to-judge-the-unvaccinated-seek-a-better-alternative/).


>"For God is love. Love is my true identity... if I do anything... that is not purely for the love of ~God~ [love] it cannot give me peace... rest... fulfillment, or joy"p61

[Shinzen Young trying to summarize enlightenment echoes Merton's sentiment.](https://youtu.be/ptkH0uK1uXM?t=451)

To me, both God and Emptiness point to a single concept: an ungraspable, inseparable blanket of love that ties all of existence together. In my personal opinion, Buddhist concepts and thought experiments are easier to reason about, while Christian concepts are often more beautiful and personal. The further you go down a mystic path, the more the differences in paths seem to vanish. All faiths try to provide answers to the ever-present questions "What is the nature of the universe? How can I have lasting happiness?". Enlightenment resolves these questions, and raises its own. Now that I'm out of my own way, how can I love and serve my universe more effectively?
